# forking conversation: peer and bager akbay on mahlas

**peer :** could you tell me about your new work "mahlas" that you have recently started working on? 

**bager :** I do not know much about what I am doing and why I am doing it. It is more like a feeling rather than an idea but I will do my best to explain it. After "Deniz Y覺lmaz", it became more clear that I enjoy the process a lot more than the result, I can even say that I am not interested in the result at all, I do not believe in it. Ok, there is a history of things we have done but even it changes everytime we talk about but that's all there is nothing more. So I started to dive more into the process of Deniz Y覺lmaz and Mahlas is a way to make this more public. It is about how we made a community school, it is about how I am trying prevent earning money from art, it is about how I can stand the political change in local and in the world, it is about weirdos, queers, monsters, it is about not playing the game but introducing/experimenting a new one.

In simple terms, Mahlas is a way of creating art together.


  * **peer :** could you elaborate on how you try to prevent earning money from art, and why? 
  
  * **bager :** How part is easy to explain; I create works that are hard to sell, I do not have a gallery to represent me, I try to perform when people wants to buy things (Deniz Y覺lmaz's poems are sold but I did not want to take the money so that the idea of Mahlas was born, I created another dialogue when someone wanted to buy Deniz Y覺lmaz), I have refused an amazing support offer from a company (they did not ask for anything in return), they offered me to cover all my expenses for one year. I refused another support offer for shepherd because I felt like I would not be able to finish it. After that we come to the why part. I do not know. I am not a rich person, I earn my living for almost more than 25 years. I started from zero, I am still close to zero. I am a hard worker but I prefer to earn money when I need and just the amount I need. I have a problem with owning stuff, I do not like to own things. I feel very close to the idea of Melami way but in authorship, when I feel like I own something I try to find a way to get away from it. I do not enjoy doing that but I do not see it as a problem either. I try to earn what I deserve and that is very hard in art, it is very speculative. This attitude I have, can change in time, I did not decide to behave like that, it happened, and it can go away. I do not know but I am interested in this feeling. I can say that I am almost observing myself doing this.

  * **peer :** how does "mahlas" differ from other modes of creating art together? does it differ from existing models? if so, how?

  * **bager :** I think the part I am building now is the concept of the artwork, then the performance will come but I accept all of this process as an artwork. It is not a *new thing*. It is a process based conceptual artwork with performances.

  * **peer :** i wanted to ask about your approach to "creating art together". do you mean that the performances to come will be what you refer to by saying "creating art together" and that "building [...] the concept of the artwork" is what *you* do now, which is a "process based conceptual artwork", and it is not something about "creating art together" but another dimension of the work? or, could you be more precise about what you mean by "creating art together"? I'd like to ask this because there are multiple approaches to this subject under various concepts such as "participation", "collaboration", "contribution", "to co-operate", "peer production" etc. and the authorship status of the parties involved and the property relations as well as the hierarchies may differ in each. even "interactivity" and "appropriation" may be considered within the broader domain of "making art together", each of which being totally different concepts. however, i do not find most of contemporary art practices defined in relation to the concepts of "appropriation" or "participation" etc. honest in relation to the attribution and redistribution of the authorship as well as the related property relations and "privileges". i would even argue that most of them exploit their main subject matter at first hand. so, i'd like to ask you what exactly do you refer to and mean by saying "creating art together" and what is your politics about it?

  * **bager :** One of the main reason I love to work with code to create code which creates something is because I am very curios about consciousness. When you make something that makes something, you may start to talk about the possibility of that first thing being conscious. I wrote a code that created images (i am an artist), it did not work. I mean it did transfer my curiosity to the observer. I was like "ok so what". Then I made a robot that creates poem (deniz yilmaz), this time the entity had a name, a character, a story and xe managed to get some attention, raised some questions but some other people was not that interested. They had good questions like "Did xe decide to write poem?", "Can xe decide when to write poem or own the poem or give an interview about what xe is doing?", I am not interested in the impersonation part (since it is very antropomorphic) but these are valid questions. The codes I can write, does not have any answer to these questions, I had to change my approach, I had to move to an organizational level, or to a meta-level. I want to create a system where the system might be accepted as an author at least as much as the people involved in the process. In fact companies almost have that, they can own stuff and they can be public but still it does not feel right. I want to create a framework, where ideas or beliefs can turn into organizations, live there, create stuff, get forked, divided, merged, give birth or die. And I do not want to make that for money, power or anything rather than their qualia. I want to add something I wrote lately, it is not directly related but might help me express the feeling. "Everytime someone praises me for something I have said, I become aware of myself and that makes me angry. I do not feel angry about myself, it feels like I have not been talking about something. Did I said those thing to create a value for me, were the words tools and I am the purpose. Do not do it, if you do it to be kind or if you do it for your appraisal in advance or you have something deeper. Please understand you are not important, neither am I but the things we talk are important. Just disappear for a while, I am gone too, just listen and give response, I say something then you say something then nothing happens, do not be happy to be with me and I will not be anything either. If the things we talk affect us, it does, we do not have to mention that. Let's make it simpler, maybe you and me are not important but the things we talk are important, maybe we are their tools, the ideas reflect upon us to live, do you have to be the light source. Maybe you are just an imperfect surface things reflect from you, maybe you can change slowly because of those reflections, that is lighter, calmer, it is like being a rock, a mountain, peaceful, like death, like not fearing from death, it is like just being what you really are."

**peer :** but, could you also describe the work here? it is not something people can experience or at least communicate through an image etc. so, it requires a description about the work for what we discuss here to make sense for the people. github repository of the work that we will also discuss here has a lot of information about the work. it is even the work itself, for now, that people can experience. but could you describe the work here once more? 



**peer :** you have  created a repository on github and uploaded the first draft text, what i would call the protocol for the work. how will it work and how are you planning to schedule the rest of the process? what will the further stages be?

**bager :** I wanted to be more transparent on the process, and create less possible space for myself to prevent self-speculation. That's why I want almost everything (just considering other peoples privacy) to be public. I will just continue to add things that I have thought, and history of the repository will show how the project changes in time.

Every part will be public, after the framework is at least a bit clear, I will start writing all the code here and you will see how a code could be ugly :) I am ok with being a terrible coder. 

Being public also pushes me to continue the project which shows that I have a strong barrier I have to fight. I think that is just about embracing the unknown but doing it in a nice way. That is so hard for me, I am trying to be as non-anthropomorphic as I can but still trying to keep the artistic performance alive. I know this process is the performance. Every key stroke, push, pull, commit is a part of it.

  * **peer :** why do you think you are a "terrible coder"? if you are a "terrible coder" and your work depends on code, does it make your work a "terrible" work? i believe you understand why i ask such a provocative question here so i'd appreciate if you reply comprehensively including how you approach writing programs in general, making art, writing program as an artwork or as a part of an artwork, having other people do it, or other aspects of the artwork for you, etc. does one need to have good, or even any programming skills, to make an artwork which requires programming? does one need to have good/any painting skills, to make an artwork as a painting? does the artist's skills or "touch" matter? what does one need to be able to make art?



  * **peer :** you emphasized the importance of the process for you and see it as a performance and as far as i understand, you developed this approach to art during the journey of deniz yilmaz project. art as a process is also an important concept in art. however, the process part is usually hidden from the audience and it is featured as a myth, as a part of the discourse created around the persona of the artist. the artists usually do not share the process themselves but it is contextualized by the critics. and even if the artist shares it first hand, it is not as "public" and "transparent" as in the example of mahlas. how mahlas works, the development of the work on github, which is maybe itself the real aesthetics of the work, is not made possible only through the information technologies, especially the internet, but also through a particular approach to this medium, which is honest to its nature. probably the first and maybe still the most successful implementation of this approach, besides wikipedia of course, is linux kernel development model. git software, which is what github is built on, was developed by linus torvalds to deal with organization of the massive collaboration/contributions to development of linux kernel. torvalds is probably the first person who made use of the real potential of internet by choosing to develop it as a peer production on the internet. even though we can say that the foundation of peer production model is the gnu project and free software movement started by richard stallman, i would argue that, they did lack the effective use of internet back then which lead to the forking of the movement under the name "open source movement" through the success of linux kernel project which makes use of the communication and collaboration potential of the internet. gnu project remained "closed circuit" in the early internet age in comparison to how linux kernel is developed and eric raymond criticized gnu project's model through cathedral/bazaar analogy, which has received positive feedback and led the way to forking of the movement. however, the open source movement and torvalds himself approach this issue as a practical solution for developing better software through effective collaboration of a large community and what matters more to me is the politics of this development model, which was put perfectly by stallman and free software movement. if internet was the technical dimension of the success of linux development model, it was the copyleft hack introduced with gnu general public license (gnu gpl) which constitutes the political dimension of linux kernel development, by regulating the property relations of such a project being developed through the collaboration of many people. torvalds also admits that his best move was to release the code for linux kernel under gun gpl but rest of his politics do differ a lot form that of free software movement. even though the linux kernel development project uses git for coordinating the development, making all the process public and transparent, they focus on the "quality" of the outcome. your approach in mahlas differs from this fundamentally by highlighting the process itself over the result. this approach is probably something unique to art because of its potential to exist independent of other organization models which dominate our life. would you like to elaborate more on technical and political aesthetics of choosing such an approach? if this process is the artwork itself, what is the ideal exhibition method of this work. or, can we say that, it is already being exhibited as an artwork? if so, what does it mean for the instituion of art; the art world? is it ready to understand and find ways to communicate such an art form?
  
  * **bager :** Well, you explained very well. To sum up from my perspective there are two main things here, first one is; process becoming the main thing and second is; using, designing and developing new technologies in a way that they might help us to change the paradigm, making life more transparent and collaborative. Where it comes to my personal understanding of art, I think artist illustrate the reality they observe, which probably is another speculation. If this speculation is accepted it becomes the new real. Stallman and Torvalds did probably the same, their thoughts and practices were about a reality which was not there yet but was summoned with their actions. Technical and political aesthetics, exhibiting this kind of work, relation to instutions/art world, these are big questions, they are very important and I want to answer them one by one, but can you please ask one by one? :) And I do not know how to make a paragraph without losing the indent in this mark down, I do not want to write huge paragraphs.

  * **peer :** in fact, all questions above were inter-related and instead of asking concrete questions expecting short factual answers i would appreciate your thoughts in general about the form and the medium of this work, it's aesthetics and the politics, along with it's exhibition methods/requirement and how/if it challenges the conventions of contemporary art?


  
**peer :** how do you imagine the journey of the work? how do you think people will react and relate to it during this process and once it is finished? how do you imagine it being public? in exhibitions? how should it be exhibited? what will it be in 10 years?

**bager :** Well I seriously doubt if people will use it for a long time maybe ever, I don't think it will be understood until it grows big, if it does. Mahlas will not be accepted for a long time, but when it starts, to work outcomes will be understood, I guess.

To be more clear, the framework (the idea) is worth reading/investigating if it creates strange outcomes. We will have to wait for that.

Ten years is impossible to guess for me, I think in one year we will see some outcomes and improvise from that point on as we always do.

  * **peer :** you said, "I seriously doubt if people will use it". does it mean that it will not work as an artwork unless people "use" it? does it need to have practical outcomes? do you see it as a "tool" rather than an artwork, or, does it need to be used by the people to function as an artwork; or in general, do you think that an artwork should have a function, like a tool, or do you think it can exist by being "useless"?

  * **bager :** No, no, nothing related. To talk about something new was never easy, and in a world full of professional speculators/politicians it is even harder. This method is probably how I build the foundation of an artwork. I have to build it in a uniq way so that I can make my own speculation. When I first published Deniz Yilmaz, it was something itself and it did not have an exact shape/meaning, so that I could start talking about it. It could be perceived easily but grab attention in a very ambiguous way. Mahlas can not be perceived yet. I have to make some uses of it which could communicate by itself. It is pretty ambigous and connected to the topics I want to talk but its lacking communication. OK, maybe I can wait a hundred years, and if someones sees something worth in this framework then it could create this effect, but come on, I do not do philosophy, I do art, I live to create the speculation, I read the philosophers, thinkers, I observe the streets and troll society so that they might also create relations with those thinkers and maybe create something more real.

**peer :** how do you read this work? what are your personal references and motivations? how excited are you about it now?

**bager :** It is just my reflection on how the world is changing, it is a reaction which is not controlled. My starting points are very simple and  familiar to most of the people around me. I am trying to understand the world politics, I dream about how I want to produce, live, I also include my daughters dreams, every comment she makes about the world is very important to me, I took them as serious as I can. 

And yes, I am a bit too much excited about it.

  * **peer :** how do you think the world is changing? how do you understand it? in fact i am asking the points where you think your understanding and approach differs from other people you know? what excites you about your approach?

  * **bager :** If I could talk or write about this I would not do art :) I work with young people, kids, from age 3 to 15. I see a pattern on how they see the world and there is another pattern which grown ups have. These two patterns are totally different. It is like possible dialectics vs current dialectic and I see a war there, a war where young people suffer while grown ups trying to save the world. I think the fight is between generations not countries, religions or companies. That is where I observe about change.

**peer :** could you also tell me about other things that occupy your mind these days? what else will you be working/thinking on while you develop this work further?

**bager :** I am trying to get away from the other things I am doing, and concentrate on Mahlas, so that no I do not want to talk about them. Just some related parts, like how we work in democratic schools in Turkey (BBOM) or how we make decisions in our atelie (iskele47). These structures have parts in this project. It may sound or feel like I am trying to create an out of world system but no, every decision I make in Mahlas is a reflection of the things I am in.
